# media-search-signal-test

Various tools for helping to improve media search on Wikimedia Commons by using labeled data

## Installation

1. create a mysql db
2. update `config.ini` to point at the right db
3. run `composer update`
4. run `php jobs/Install.php` to install the DB schema (add the `--populate` param to populate the tables with existing labeled data)
5. away you go

A job can just be run via `php jobs/<filename>` or on toolforge it can be run using [`jsub`](https://wikitech.wikimedia.org/wiki/Help:Toolforge/Grid#Submitting_simple_one-off_jobs_using_'jsub') 

If you want to use the web app for labeling images locally, you need to point a webserver at `public_html`

## Use the labeled images to compare search algorithms

We need a quick way to compare search algorithms without having to A/B test, so we made some scripts to do comparisons by running a searches for the search terms used to get the labeled images in the first place, then counting the labeled images in the results and calculating some metrics like precision, recall and f1score. 

If you want to run this locally:
* load the existing labeled data into your database using `php jobs/Install.php --populate` (note this will delete any labeled data already in your database)
* `php jobs/AnalyzeResults.php` ... this will run default mediasearch on commons, analyse the results and output them to stdout

More detailed information below ...

#### jobs/FindLabeledImagesInResults.php

Search commons using MediaSearch for all the search terms in `ratedSearchResult`, then find all the labeled images in each resultset and store them

The point of this is to allow the user to do a search and store labeled images from the search, in order to allow the results of different searches to be compared.

Results are stored in the tables
* `search` Description of the search
* `resultset` Results for a search term for a particular search
* `labeledResult` A labeled result from a resultset, with its position and rating

Params
* `description` A description to be stored in the `search` table. Defaults to the date and time.
* `searchUrl` A custom search url. Defaults to standard MediaSearch (query builder + rescore)

#### jobs/AnalyzeResults.php

Analyze the (labeled) results from a particular search.

Calculates f1score, recall, and precision of the top 25, 50 and 100 results for each search result, and writes them with their averages to a text file.

If a search id is provided, the results for that search are analysed. If not, `FindLabeledImagesInResults.php` is run first, and the results from that are analysed.

Params
* `description` A description to be stored in the `search` table. Defaults to the date and time (only used if `searchId` is not provided).
* `searchId` The id of the stored search that we want to analyse.

#### runSearches.php

A convenience script that runs `jobs/AnalyzeResults.php` analysis on a pre-defined bunch of searches, and outputs the results.

## Use the labeled images to create a dataset for training an elasticsearch model

elasticsearch provides a thing called "learning to rank", where it applies machine learning to labeled data in order to improve search results ranking. See https://elasticsearch-learning-to-rank.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html 

To create a training dataset for learning-to-rank in elasticsearch we need to:
1. Create a "featureset" in elasticsearch. A featureset is basically a set of additional fields with their own query params that you tack on to a normal elasticsearch query, and you'll get back the scores for each field in your response.
2. Prepare elasticsearch queries for all the labeled data you have for each search term, plus the featureset stuff tacked on.
3. Run each query, and munge the responses into a format that elasticsearch can use for model-building (ranklib format).

#### Step 1: the featureset

Create an elasticsearch featureset and send it to your elasticsearch instance via a POST request (see the docs referenced above)

The example featureset `input/featureset.MediaSearch_20210127.json` corresponds to the elasticsearch query generated by WikibaseMediaInfo. 

#### Steps 2 and 3: preparing the queries and creating the ranklib file

Easiest to do this using the defaults by running `php createRankLib.php`. Ranklib file 


1. run `php jobs/GenerateSearchTermsWithEntities.php` to generate a file (`searchTermsWithEntities.csv`) containing all the labeled search terms and any corresponding wikidata items they might have
2. run `php jobs/GenerateFeatureQueries.php --queryJsonGenerator="MediaSearchSignalTest\Jobs\MediaSearch_20210127"` and the query json files will be output to `out/ltr/`

##### search terms

The example featureset needs as inputs
* a search term
* the language of the search term

for so it can find things using structured data. 

We already have search term and language in `input/searchTerms.csv` MediaSearch_20210127_1216.json and MediaSearch_20210127_1216.json

We also have search term, language AND the `statement_keywords` strings in `input/searchTermsWithEntities.csv`, which was generated using `jobs/GenerateSearchTermsWithEntitiesFile.php`

##### query json

The script `jobs/GenerateFeatureQueries.php` reads the `searchTermsWithEntities.csv` file, and generates json for elasticsearch queries for all the labeled results for all the search terms.

To run the script you need to pass the param `queryJsonGenerator` which is the name of the class used to construct the query json for each set of labeled results/search terms. 

ATM there is just one class available - `MediaSearch_20210127` in the job php file itself, which corresponds to the example featureset . 

So, to create the queries, run `php jobs/GenerateFeatureQueries.php --queryJsonGenerator="MediaSearchSignalTest\Jobs\MediaSearch_20210127"` and the query json files will be output to `out/ltr/`.

(note that because mysql select doesn't distinguish 'dali' from 'dalí' you'll have to adjust the json files MediaSearch_20210127_1216.json and MediaSearch_20210127_1287.json for those queries to work (or just remove them))

### Step 3: creating the ranklib file

The script `jobs/GenerateRanklibFile.php` generates a ranklib file that can be used to train a model in elasticsearch. 

Params:
* `queryDir` ... should be `out/ltr/` if you used the default setting to create the queries in the last step
* `featuresetName` ... will be MediaSearch_20210127 for the example featureset

The script expects there to be an instance of elasticsearch at `https://127.0.0.1:9243/`. When running the script myself I set up an ssh tunnel to cloudelastic (a replica of the live search indices) using `ssh -n -L127.0.0.1:9243:cloudelastic1001.wikimedia.org:9243 mwdebug1002.eqiad.wmnet "sleep 36000"` - if you do the same the script should just work.

## Gather and label search results

#### jobs/GetImagesForClassification.php

Use this to gather search results from wikimedia commons so they can be labeled via the web app. It searches commons for each term in the input file, and inserts the results into `ratedSearchResult` with `rating` set to null

Params
* `searchTermsFile` A comma-separated file. First column is ignored, second should contain the search term, third should contain the language of the search term 

#### public_html/

A little web app where the user is presented with a random image from the stored search results, and rates it as good, bad or indifferent

#### public_html/bulk.html

A form where you can enter a search term plus language with a list of good/bad/indifferent results. It gets inserted directly into the labeled data.


